optional reproducible build process for openenclave on linux (#3744)
openenclave/openenclave: docs/DesignDocs/ReproducibleBuildUsingNix.md

any url that points to the correct heirarchy can be used. If no prebuilt version of a package is available at
the cache, the package will be built. Since the package has a fixed output, there is no difference in output
using the cached version or one custom built.. 

#### Language:

Nix is a language which looks much like Haskell. It is a Haskell derivitive in the same sense that
Java is a C++ derivitive, which is to say it carries over syntactic conventions but not strictly or
completely, and adds some features not in Haskell.

The basis for the language is the function.  A function is an expression which returns a value, the value can
be a singleton (for example integer), set (indicated by braces), or list (indicated by brackets []). Functions
may include functions. They must be declared in the "let" section of the declaration.  Functions are called only 
when referenced and reduced to values.

When you see what appears to be regular code with braces and a series of semicolon separators is actually a set
being used as an argument.

There are no variables, just functions returning contants. Datatypes are a property of values, but once declared

> the function has a constant datatype. function results can be transformed but there is no casting as such. The let
> clause is where a number of functions can be declared. The in clause is where they are used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the function has a constant datatype. function results can be transformed but there is no casting as such. The `let`
clause is where a number of functions can be declared. The `in` clause is where they are used.
```

```
let
    # function returning an integer:
    three = 3;
    # function returning a set. Set members are retrieved through the dot operator, so myset."one":
    myset = { one = 1; two = 2; three = 3; }
    #
    mylist = [ "one", "two", "three" ];
in 
     
```

if then else exists, but the form is similar to the C conditional,  if <cond> then <alt1> else <alt2> where cond,
alt1 and alt2 are all function calls.  if returns a value.

```
    arch = if platform ? arch then platform.arch else "x86_64-linux"
```
  
There is no sequencing as such. Functions are composed through expression evaluation, so the expression:
```
    this that the_other 
```
will execute the function "the_other" and return its value as an argument to "that" which in turn returns its value to

> "this".  There are various caching facilities, so its possible that one or mor e of those arguments will be 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"this".  There are various caching facilities, so it's possible that one or more of those arguments will be 
```

the "print" will actually be evaluated.  

There are no loops in nix. The functionality of the loop is replaced by the map function. 

### Nix data flow.

The nix building process starts out with a nix expression. The expression is located in a file which is 
specified to the nix-instantiate tool, or on the command line. The instantiation process binds the 
dependencies specified by the expression (in buildInputs or checkInputs) to the concrete resources offered by
the nix repo, which specifies the universe of packages available, calculates a sha256 signature for the built product, 
then places the concretised expression into the nix store as a derivation.

```
nix-instantiate -I/home/azureuser/ default.nix
```

A trivial example of a nix expression:
```
with (import <nixpkgs>) {};

let
  # Use the let-in clause to assign the derivation to a variable
  myScript = pkgs.writeShellScriptBin "helloWorld" "echo Hello World";
in
stdenv.mkDerivation rec {
  name = "test-environment";

  src = ./.;
  # Add the derivation to the PATH
  buildInputs = [ myScript ];

  installPhase =
  ''
       mkdir $out
       cp -r ${myScript} $out/
  '';
}
```
  

> In the above, let is the initialisation/declaration part of the expression. The actual expression proper begins after

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above, "let" is the initialisation/declaration part of the expression. The actual expression proper begins after
```

         , ("depsTargetTarget", "")
         , ("depsTargetTargetPropagated", "")
         , ("doCheck", "")
         , ("doInstallCheck", "")
         , ( "installPhase"
           , "mkdir $out\ncp -r /nix/store/qsgajw2yhrf33qgibsvd9y8zaw64w7j7-helloWorld $out/\n" )
         , ("name", "test-environment")
         , ("nativeBuildInputs", "")
         , ( "out"
           , "/nix/store/7v249vqann9jrnvb40wri7x4kqr38rp2-test-environment" )
         , ("outputs", "out")
         , ("patches", "")
         , ("propagatedBuildInputs", "")
         , ("propagatedNativeBuildInputs", "")
         , ("src", "/nix/store/l99yzhb3ngxyrfnmglmh98p7f602id2r-xxx")
         , ( "stdenv"
           , "/nix/store/sm7kk5n84vaisqvhk1yfsjqls50j8s0m-stdenv-linux" )
         , ("strictDeps", "")
         , ("system", "x86_64-linux") ] )
```

The derivation can then be used to build the output using either
```
   nix-store --realize
```
or more compactly
```
   nix-build test-environment 
```
will perform both instantiate and realise. The result is a build output located in the nix-store.
```
/nix/store/syibqm72433pzxd46hyw3xbr5swq286j-test-environment
```
which contains:
```

> $ ls /nix/store/syibqm72433pzxd46hyw3xbr5swq286j-test-environment

Reviewer: Does nix work for Windows builds as well?  The title of this PR, the filename, and the intro in this doc are not Linux specific.  But various places herein only mention Linux.

Author: Nix is completely foreign to windows, and I am unaware of any move to port it.  Currently Visual C compiler and linker brand object files with time/date/user/permissions etc information that make it impossible to do a reproducible build.  A repro build could be done using clang, but I suspect that would be unacceptable to most windows developers.

Author: I did change the PR title and comment.

- The package repository for a linux distro "NixOS" which will eventully be a standalone distro. In that 
  case packages are chosen for release branches with an eye to mutual compatibility and working well within
  that defined universe.  

- The package repository is also used for producing packages for other linux distros (ubuntu, debian,
  redhat, fedora, arch, gentoo) with easily auditable dependencies. In this case, it is necessary to
  consider specific compatible versions of packages.  In particular, glibc must be an equal or older
  revision than the glibc of the platform or the program will not dynamically link.  This is by design.
  Ubuntu 18.04 is limited to glibc 2.27. The current lts release 20.04 usues glibc 2.31 and fedora 33 
  uses libc-2.32.  The nixpkgs branch release-20.09 is based on glibc 2.32.  The somewhat older branch
  20.03 uses libc-2.30 so can work on the current common distros, including the current rhel.  

  While it is not difficult to change the version of glibc in a custom repo branch, since glibc is linked 
  by every package, to do so would require a custom repo build. In that case, it would require a custom 

>   cache to provide prebuilding, or everything would require everything be built from source..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  cache to provide prebuilding, or everything would require everything be built from source.
``

### Caching and Hydra

The official branches in nixpkgs are prebuilt and available at cache.nixos.org. Caching is keyed to the build outputs
sha digest, so custom environments will be able to use those prebuilts so long as no changes have been made. 
If any changes are made to that package, any package related to the changed package will need to be custom

> built and cached in nix store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
built and cached in the nix store.
```

> ## A Nix build system for OpenEnclave SDK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## A Nix build system for Open Enclave SDK
```

> We propose to add an optional nix based build environment for OpenEnclave SDK using docker containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose to add an optional nix based build environment for Open Enclave SDK using docker containers.
```

This would consist of :
- Dockerfile.nix and build-oe-nix-build.sh for building the oe nix docker image locally.
- build_openenclave.sh for building the oe deb package via a nix environment.
- Dockerfile.test and test-oe-nix-build.sh for verifying that package is functional.

The process builds a reproducible .deb package of openenclave-sdk. 

> This process can be integrated with ADO or CPDX CI, but that is not part of this submission. We do not currently

Reviewer: nit: expand ADO and CPDX acronyms on first use

recommend depending exclusively on a nix environment for production packaging and CI.

### Dockerfile.nix

The dockerfile is passed up to four build args:

 - BASE_IMAGE allows for different os base images, in particular it allows the substitution of a
   CPDX base image rather than the generic ubuntu 20.04. As was previously mentioned, we are basing on 

>    ubuntu 20.04 because package versions align best with nixpkgs release-20.03.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean the OE SDK binaries produced might not work on Ubuntu 18.04 as the glibc version dynamically linked to the produced OE SDK binaries is v2.32, higher than the v2.27 available on Ubuntu 18.04?

Author: nixpkgs release-20.03 uses glibc v2.30, which is compatible with ubuntu but not ubuntu 18.04 which uses 2.27.

I tried overriding glibc version and was successful, but it meant removing all the patches the nixpkgs expressison contained, and eliminating all caching since glibc is a dependency for every package in the repo.  19.09 did contain an old enough glibc for ubuntu 18.04 but it is end of life and no longer supported. I was warned away from using it. Also, it contained a number of packages (openssl etc) that were very old.  I don't quite know why the major gap, but there it is.

This supports my impression that we need to manage our own fork of nixpkgs if we are to use this in production.

Author: Quick background to clarify.  glibc is designed no to dynalink with platforms that have an older version of glibc than the client application. So a client that has been linked with glibc 2.27 will work transparently on a platform that has glibc 2.30, but a client that is linked with 2.30 will not work on a platform that has glibc 2.27.  It is not practical to upgrade the glibc for the platform.

The nixpkgs repo is  designed to implement a quasi-distro, nixos, which is based on the nix system.  The packages in the 
nixpkgs repo are intended to serve that purpose.  It is not a non goal that nixpkgs supports building for other distros, but the priority is ambiguous.  The straightforward fix is to build a fork of nixpkgs which contains the expressions for a set of vetted packages, but that would be a large job to do right, and an ongoing commitment of resources.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/intel/linux-sgx/blob/544159a94a59547a18b7bff1d28a94bb14053572/linux/reproducibility/Dockerfile refers to a "/nix/store/681354n3k44r8z90m35hm8945vsp95h1-glibc-2.27". Is the problem with directly using the glibc-2.27 package that no pairing between the package and a .drv file can be established?

Author: Correct, plus that derivation is coming from (I beleive) 19.09 or even 19.03, both EOL and deprecated.

Author: IMO we should set up a common fork for nixpkgs that can be used by all of our partners and ourselves, which can be curated, and package versions set to reflect the OS versions we wish to support. Then the issue of packager version overrides etc disappears along with any possible reservations about trusting the packages

 - BUILD_USER, BUILD_USER_ID, BUILD_USER_HOME need to be set together.
   Reproducibility requires a standard build user, since the tar directory entries in the deb package include 
   user and group information.  We default to "azureuser" "1000" "/home/azureuser"

The script "build-oe-nix-image.sh" is a thin wrapper. It takes no arguments, and just passes the needed arguments
to docker build.  If it needs to be modified, a new script should be created.

Dockerfile.nix prepares the build image by:

- adding via apt minimum packages for the outer image. This includes a text editor (vim) and ELF patch utility (patchelf).

> - sets up nit configuration.

Reviewer: Should "nit" be "nix"?

- diables apt.

- creates the build user and directories, groups etc.

- creates a nix expression for building openenclave via (shell.nix).

- installs nix as the build user

- calls the prep-nix-build.sh script which sets up the git clone of nix pkgs and preinstalls the package
  derivations needed for building openenclave into the nix store. The search process for dependencies in
  nix is to refer to the nix store first, before looking at nixpkgs or contacting the cache if enabled. While
  we cannot select package versions from the expression, but must depend on the nixpkgs repo to provide the

>   correct versions, we can prime the nix store to provide the exact derivation we wish before referring to the repo.

Reviewer 2: Intel SGX SDK [reproducible build](https://github.com/intel/linux-sgx/blob/544159a94a59547a18b7bff1d28a94bb14053572/linux/reproducibility/Dockerfile) seems to relying on specific version of packages in nixpkgs repo/cache directly. What's the benefit of the "prime the nix store" process?

Author: We lock the .drvs into the nix store in the docker build process. This preserves the relationship between the package and its dependencies, as well as preventing garbage collection of the drvs until the correct packages are installed.

Author: Note the nix-env which retrieves or builds the build outputs from the .drv uses the expected sha digest of the packages, which will alert us if something else is coming up.

Reviewer 2: @yakman2020 , what does the term "packages" in  "This preserves the relationship between the package and its dependencies, as well as preventing garbage collection of the drvs until the correct packages are installed."  refer to? Does it refer to `nix-build` output, as the "qsgajw2yhrf33qgibsvd9y8zaw64w7j7-helloWorld" in the example? If that's the case, once the pairing between "znmj0axqf4v5mjwswd9bq3dvxf0jcsah-test-environment.drv" and "qsgajw2yhrf33qgibsvd9y8zaw64w7j7-helloWorld" is established and recorded for audit purpose, can the docker image directly use the "packages" in nixpkgs repo/cache and bypass the "prime the nix store" process?

Author: nix always uses any realised build output in nix store if it has them.  nix-env given a drv gets them from the prebuilt cache/channel.  But ther eis no auditability past that.  The drv points at the build output, the build output does not point at the drv.  A lone build output in nix is just as anonymous as a deb package.

- adds a build.env file which contains environment values to control the build.  This is not part of the 
  - REV is the git revision (commit or tag) to pull for the build.
  - SHA is the sha256 hash of the tar file downloaded from git.
  - DO_CHECK enables ctests as part of the build.
  - DEB_SHA specifies the expected result sha25sum for the .deb file produced. An error will be thrown if the 
    sha is incorrect. If not set, the sha is not checked.

- adds needed files for ctest to the .nix_libs directory, which will be referred to by ctest. Nix expressions
  cannot refer to libraries outside the minimum environment and explicit inputs, so these libraries are needed
  to use sgx (and eventually TrustZone) facilties.

- sets the build user as the user. Among other things, this means the build image when run cannot be 
  modified by the addition of apt packages.

The resulting image is named openenclave-build. It can (and should) be generated once and pushed into a common 
repo.

### build_openenclave.sh

Runs the image produced by docker build, with arguments resolved.
The output of the process is a .deb and a .nar file containing an exported nix store for use in developing 

> openenclave sdk apps using nix.

Reviewer 2: Is the instruction to use the OE SDK .deb and other tool chain to build an OE App captured in this design doc or some other doc?

Author: Both a directory readme.md and the end of the design doc.

Reviewer 2: I only found "Work Flow" section at the end of the document. My understand is that that section only talks about building the OE SDK, not about how a OE SDK user makes a reproducible build of an OE App. What I was referring to is an equivalent of https://github.com/openenclave/openenclave/blob/master/docs/GettingStartedDocs/buildandsign.md, but with instruction to make a reproducible build. Probably also need to use a docker container with specific clang/gcc NIX package?

Author: It has that.  
All the steps needed to create a reproducible package are done in the container.  There is no need for user intervention.

Building the build image is optional in the sense that if it was pushed somewhere one could pull it. Other than that, just run the build_openenclave.sh script and a suitable package will show up in the output directory.  In this, it is similar to linux-sgx/linux/reproducibility, which likewise just builds the package.  

Unlike the linux, it is quite practical to shift to a new version/tag and I probably should discuss that more.
